User documentation for Pascal VOC format (#228)
openvinotoolkit/datumaro: docs/pascal_voc_user_manual.md

## Contents
- [Load Pascal VOC dataset](#load-pascal-voc-dataset)
- [Export to other formats](#export-to-other-formats)
- [Import to Pascal VOC](#import-to-pascal-vOC)
- [Datumaro functionality](#datumaro-functionality)
- [Dataset statistics](#dataset-statistics)

## Load Pascal VOC dataset
The Pascal VOC dataset is available for free download [here](http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2012/index.html#devkit)

There are two ways to create datumaro project and add Pascal VOC dataset to it

``` bash
datum import --format voc --input-paath <path/to/dataset>
# or
datum create
datum add path -f voc <path/to/dataset>
```

It is possible to specify project name and project directory run `datum create --help` for more information.
Pascal VOC dataset directory should have the following structure:

<!--lint disable fenced-code-flag-->
```
└─ Dataset/
   ├── label_map.txt # list of non-pascal labels (optional)
   ├── Annotations/
   │     ├── ann1.xml # Pascal VOC format annotation file
   │     ├── ann2.xml
   │     ├── ...
   ├── JPEGImages/
   │    ├── img1.jpg
   │    ├── img2.jpg
   │    ├── ...
   ├── SegmentationClass/ # directory with semantic segmentation masks

>    │    ├── mask1.png

Reviewer: These files must have the same names as dataset images.

   │    ├── mask2.png
   │    ├── ...
   ├── SegmentationObject/ # directory with instance segmentation masks

>    │    ├── instance_mask1.png

Reviewer: These files must have the same names as dataset images.

   │    ├── instance_mask2.png
   │    ├── ...
   ├── ImageSets/
   │    ├── Main/ # directory with list of images for detection and classification task

>    │    │   ├── test.txt  # list of image in test subset names without extension
>    |    |   ├── train.txt # list of image in train subset names without extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   │    │   ├── test.txt  # list of image names in test subset (without extension)
   |    |   ├── train.txt # list of image names in train subset (without extension)
```

There are few ways to convert Pascal VOC dataset to other dataset format:

``` bash
datum project import -f voc -i <path/to/voc>
datum export -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
# or
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
```

Also it is possible using filters for converting, check user manual for information about filtering:

``` bash
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> \
    -f yolo -o <path/to/output/dir> \
    --filter-mode FILTER_MODE \
    --filter '<xpath filter expression>'
```

Some formats have extra arguments for converting, run `datum export -f FORMAT -- -h` for more information. For example voc_segmentation format has extra argument `--label_map` which get opportunity to load user color map for segmentation mask:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt

# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
```

Also you can use original voc format of label map, for example:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

> ## Import to Pascal VOC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Export to Pascal VOC
```

There are few ways to convert dataset to Pascal VOC format:

``` bash
# export dataset into Pascal VOC format (classification) from existing project
datum export -p <path/to/project> -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> -- --tasks classification

# converting to Pascal VOC format from other format
datum convert -if imagenet -i <path/to/imagenet/dataset> \
    -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> \
    -- --label_map voc --save-images
```

Argument `--tasks` allow to specify tasks for export dataset, by default datumaro uses all tasks.
Argument   `--label_map` allow to define user label map, for example

``` bash
# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt
```

Or you can use original Pascal VOC label map:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

> ## Datumaro functionality

Reviewer: Try to present this part as a tutorial about solving some practical problems. Try to show and explain why we might need to do this. It will much more interesting and useful than just a list of commands.

Datumaro supports filtering, transformation, merging and etc. for all formats and for the Pascal VOC format in particular. Follow [user manual](../docs/user_manual.md) to get more information about these operations.
Some examples of using datumaro operations for Pascal VOC dataset format:

``` bash
# import and compare 2009 and 2012 Pascal VOC datasets

> datum import -f voc <path/to/voc2009> -o ./2009

Reviewer: There are 2 main versions: 2007 and 2012

datum import -f voc <path/to/voc2012> -o ./2012
cd 2009 && datum diff ../2012
...
Datasets have different lengths: 15674 vs 34314
Unmatched items in the second dataset: {('2011_002719', 'trainval'), ... }

# extract dataset with only car and bus class items from train subset

> datum filter --mode items+annotations \

Reviewer: Every transform command outputs result into a new project directory. An output directory can be specified with `-o`.

``` bash
# export dataset into Pascal VOC format (classification) from existing project
datum export -p <path/to/project> -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> -- --tasks classification

# converting to Pascal VOC format from other format
datum convert -if imagenet -i <path/to/imagenet/dataset> \
    -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> \
    -- --label_map voc --save-images
```

Argument `--tasks` allow to specify tasks for export dataset,
by default Datumaro uses all tasks.
Argument   `--label_map` allow to define user label map, for example

``` bash
# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt
```

Or you can use original Pascal VOC label map:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

## Datumaro functionality

Datumaro supports filtering, transformation, merging etc. for all formats
and for the Pascal VOC format in particular. Follow
[user manual](../docs/user_manual.md)
to get more information about these operations.

There are few examples of using Datumaro operations to solve
particular problems:

> - Example 1. Preparing Pascal VOC dataset for converting to Market-1501 dataset format.

Reviewer: Add an explanation, why these transformations needed for the conversion.

``` bash
# create Datumaro project with Pascal VOC dataset

> datum import -n myproject -f voc -i <path/to/voc/dataset>

Reviewer: Using `-o` instead of `-n` might be more convenient.

# convert labeled shapes into bboxes
datum transform -t shapes_to_boxes

# keep only person class items
datum filter -p myproject-shapes_to_boxes \
    --mode items+annotations \
    -e '/item/annotation[label="person"]' \
    -o tmp_project

# delete other labels from dataset
datum transform -p tmp_project -o final_project \
    -t remap_labels -- -l person:person --default delete
```

To make sure that the converting was succesful we can check the output project:

```bash
cd <path/to/final/project>
datum info
```

> - Example 2. Pascal VOC 2007 use about 900MB disk space, you can store half as much if keep

Reviewer: Disk space is a faintly weak argument. I suggest to consider cross-validation scenario, where the validation subset is split into N parts, a model is trained N times on N-1 parts and validated on the rest 1 part.

only store the test subset, and with Datumaro split the test subset into test
and training subsets:

```bash
# create Datumaro project with Pascal VOC 2007 (only test subset) dataset
datum import -f voc -i ./VOC2007

# split the test subset into test and training subsets
datum transform -t random_split

# or you can specify ratio for subsets (by default test:.67 train:.33)
datum transform -t random_split -- -s train:.5 -s test:.5
```

- Example 3. If you don`t need a variety of classes in Pascal VOC dataset,
with Datumaro you can rename the classes for your task and
thus assign the same name to different labels:

```bash
# create Datumaro project with Pascal VOC dataset
datum import -f voc -i ./VOC2007

# rename the labels
datum transform -t remap_labels -- -l car:vehicle -l aeroplane:vehicle \
    -l bicycle:vehicle -l boat:vehicle -l bus:vehicle -l car:vehicle \
    -l train:vehicle -l motorbike:vehicle -l bottle:indoor -l chair:indoor \
    -l diningtable:indoor -l pottedplant:indoor -l sofa:indoor \
    -l tvmonitor:indoor -l bird:animal -l cat:animal -l dog:animal \
    -l horse:animal -l sheep:animal -l cow:animal -l person:person \
    --default delete
```

> - Example 4. When choosing a dataset for research, it is often useful to find out how the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Example 4. When multiple datasets are used for research, it can be useful to find out how the
```

datasets differ from each other, to see information about this difference, you
can run `datum diff`. For example calculate difference between Pascal VOC 2007
and Pascal VOC 2012 trainval subsets:

```bash

> datum import -n ./project2007 -f voc -i <path/to/voc/2007>
> datum import -n ./project2012 -f voc -i <path/to/voc/2012>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datum import -o ./project2007 -f voc -i <path/to/voc/2007>
datum import -o ./project2012 -f voc -i <path/to/voc/2012>
```

   |    |   ├── ...
   │    ├── Action/ # directory with list of images for action classification task
   │    │   ├── test.txt
   |    |   ├── train.txt
   |    |   ├── ...
   │    ├── Segmentation/ # directory with list of images for segmentation task
   │    │   ├── test.txt
   |    |   ├── train.txt
   |    |   ├── ...
```

The `ImageSets` directory should contain at least one of the directories:
`Main`, `Layout`, `Action`, `Segmentation`.
These directories contain `.txt` files
with a list of images in a subset, the subset name is the same as the `.txt` file name .

It is also possible to import specific tasks
of Pascal VOC dataset instead of the whole dataset,
for example:

``` bash
datum add path -f voc_detection <path/to/dataset/ImageSets/Main/train.txt>
```

Datumaro supports the following Pascal VOC tasks:
- Image classification (`voc_classification`)
- Object detection (`voc_detection`)
- Action classification (`voc_action`)
- Class and instance segmentation (`voc_segmentation`)
- Person layout detection (`voc_layout`)

To make sure that the selected dataset has been added to the project, you can run
`datum info`, which will display the project and dataset information.

> ## Export to other formats

Reviewer: Add a section about supported annotation types, attributes and their interpretation, import and export options, optional and mandatory files.

```

Argument `--tasks` allow to specify tasks for export dataset,
by default Datumaro uses all tasks.
Argument   `--label_map` allow to define user label map, for example

``` bash
# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt
```

Or you can use original Pascal VOC label map:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

## Datumaro functionality

Datumaro supports filtering, transformation, merging etc. for all formats
and for the Pascal VOC format in particular. Follow
[user manual](../docs/user_manual.md)
to get more information about these operations.

There are few examples of using Datumaro operations to solve
particular problems:

- Example 1. Preparing Pascal VOC dataset for converting to Market-1501 dataset format.
Market-1501 dataset only has a person class, marked with a bounding box.
And to perform the conversion we could filter the Pascal VOC dataset.
With Datumaro we can do it like this

``` bash
# create Datumaro project with Pascal VOC dataset
datum import -o myproject -f voc -i <path/to/voc/dataset>

# convert labeled shapes into bboxes

> datum transform -t shapes_to_boxes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datum transform -p myproject -t shapes_to_boxes
```

# keep only person class items
datum filter -p myproject-shapes_to_boxes \
    --mode items+annotations \
    -e '/item/annotation[label="person"]' \
    -o tmp_project

# delete other labels from dataset
datum transform -p tmp_project -o final_project \
    -t remap_labels -- -l person:person --default delete
```

To make sure that the converting was succesful we can check the output project:

```bash
cd <path/to/final/project>
datum info
```

- Example 2. By default Pascal VOC 2012 dataset includes only one train and one validation subsets.
With Datumaro you can use cross-validation approach for the task:

```bash
# create Datumaro project with Pascal VOC 2012
datum import -f voc -i ./VOC2012

# spliting dataset into 3 parts
datum transform -o iter1 -t random_split -- -s train1:.33 -s train2:.33 -s val:.34

# train and validate the model ...
# reorganize subsets for 2nd iteration
datum transform -p iter1 -o iter2 -t map_subsets -- -s train2:val -s val:train2

# train and validate the model ...
# reorganize subsets for 3rd iteration
datum transform -p iter2 -o iter3 -t map_subsets -- -s train1:val -s val:train1

# train and validate the model ...
```

> - Example 3. If you don`t need a variety of classes in Pascal VOC dataset,

Reviewer: Let's remove e 2 and 3 from this section and move them into a separate tutorial file. Then add an example of a parsed dataset in the code. Keep them simple, but informative.

with a list of images in a subset, the subset name is the same as the `.txt` file name .

It is also possible to import specific tasks
of Pascal VOC dataset instead of the whole dataset,
for example:

``` bash
datum add path -f voc_detection <path/to/dataset/ImageSets/Main/train.txt>
```

Datumaro supports the following Pascal VOC tasks:
- Image classification (`voc_classification`)
- Object detection (`voc_detection`)
- Action classification (`voc_action`)
- Class and instance segmentation (`voc_segmentation`)
- Person layout detection (`voc_layout`)

To make sure that the selected dataset has been added to the project, you can run
`datum info`, which will display the project and dataset information.

## Export to other formats

Datumaro can convert Pascal VOC dataset into any other format
[Datumaro supports](../docs/user_manual.md#supported-formats).

Such conversion will only be successful if the output
format can represent the type of dataset you want to convert,
e.g. image classification annotations can be
saved in `ImageNet` format, but no as `COCO keypoints`.

There are few ways to convert Pascal VOC dataset to other dataset format:

``` bash

> datum project import -f voc -i <path/to/voc>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datum import -f voc -i <path/to/voc>
```

datum export -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
# or
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
```

> Also it is possible using filters for converting, check

Reviewer: I'm not sure filtering options should be described here.

[user manual](../docs/user_manual.md#filter-project)
for information about filtering:

``` bash
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> \
    -f yolo -o <path/to/output/dir> \
    --filter-mode FILTER_MODE \
    --filter '<xpath filter expression>'
```

Some formats provide extra options for conversion.
To get information about them, run
`datum export -f <FORMAT> -- -h`
These options are passed after double dash (`--`) in the command line.

> For example, the `voc_segmentation` format has an extra argument

Reviewer: This information is described twice. Better replace it with `--save-images`, for example.

`--label_map`, which provides an option to load a custom color map for
segmentation masks:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt

# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
```

Also you can use original voc format of label map, for example:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

## Export to Pascal VOC

There are few ways to convert dataset to Pascal VOC format:

``` bash
# export dataset into Pascal VOC format (classification) from existing project
datum export -p <path/to/project> -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> -- --tasks classification

# converting to Pascal VOC format from other format
datum convert -if imagenet -i <path/to/imagenet/dataset> \
    -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> \
    -- --label_map voc --save-images
```

Argument `--tasks` allow to specify tasks for export dataset,
by default Datumaro uses all tasks.

> Argument   `--label_map` allow to define user label map, for example

Reviewer: Add descriptions for all the export parameters. Add information how to use colormap to change colors in an existing dataset. Add information how colormap should look like to import a dataset in the grayscale format.

datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt
```

Or you can use original Pascal VOC label map:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

## Particular use cases

Datumaro supports filtering, transformation, merging etc. for all formats
and for the Pascal VOC format in particular. Follow
[user manual](../docs/user_manual.md)
to get more information about these operations.

There are few examples of using Datumaro operations to solve
particular problems with Pascal VOC dataset:

### Example 1. How to prepare an original dataset for training.
In this example, preparing the original dataset to train the semantic segmentation model includes:
loading,
checking duplicate images,
setting the number of images,
replacing masks of instances with one mask,
splitting into subsets,
export the result to Pascal VOC format.

```bash
datum create -o project
datum add path -p project -f voc_segmentation ./VOC2012/ImageSets/Segmentation/trainval.txt
datum stats -p project # check statisctics.json -> repeated images
datum transform -p project -o ndr_project -t ndr -- -w trainval -k 2500
datum filter -p ndr_project -o trainval2500 -e '/item[subset="trainval"]'

> datum transform -p trainval2500 -o semantic_seg -t merge_instance_segments

Reviewer: `merge_instance_segments` doesn't make sense for this format.

datum transform -p semantic_seg -o final_project -t random_split -- -s train:.8 -s val:.2
datum export -p final_project -o dataset -f voc -- --label-map voc --save-images
```

### Example 2. How to create custom dataset

```python
from datumaro.components.dataset import Dataset
from datumaro.util.image import Image
from datumaro.components.extractor import Bbox, Polygon, Label, DatasetItem

dataset = Dataset.from_iterable([
    DatasetItem(id='image1', image=Image(path='image1.jpg', size=(10, 20)),
       annotations=[Label(3),
           Bbox(1.0, 1.0, 10.0, 8.0, label=0, attributes={'difficult': True, 'running': True}),
           Polygon([1, 2, 3, 2, 4, 4], label=2, attributes={'occluded': True}),
           Polygon([6, 7, 8, 8, 9, 7, 9, 6], label=2),
        ]
    ),
], categories=['person', 'sky', 'water', 'lion'])

dataset.transform('polygons_to_masks')

> dataset.export('./mydataset', 'voc', label_map='my_labelmap.txt')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataset.export('./mydataset', format='voc', label_map='my_labelmap.txt')
```

"""
my_labelmap.txt:
# label:color_rgb:parts:actions
person:0,0,255:hand,foot:jumping,running
sky:128,0,0::
water:0,128,0::
lion:255,128,0::
"""
```

### Example 3. Load, filter and convert from code
Load Pascal VOC dataset, and export train subset with items
which has `jumping` attribute:

```python
from datumaro.components.dataset import Dataset

> dataset = Dataset.import_from('./VOC2012', 'voc')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataset = Dataset.import_from('./VOC2012', format='voc')
```

train_dataset = dataset.get_subset('train').as_dataset()

def only_jumping(item):
    for ann in item.annotations:
        if ann.attributes.get('jumping'):
            return True
    return False

train_dataset.select(only_jumping)

> train_dataset.export('./jumping_label_me', 'label_me', save_images=True)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
train_dataset.export('./jumping_label_me', format='label_me', save_images=True)
```

```

### Example 4. Get information about items in Pascal VOC 2012 dataset for segmentation task:

```python
from datumaro.components.dataset import Dataset
from datumaro.components.extractor import AnnotationType

> dataset = Dataset.import_from('./VOC2012', 'voc')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataset = Dataset.import_from('./VOC2012', format='voc')
```

> def has_mask(item):

Reviewer: VOC doesn't have polygon annotations.

format can represent the type of dataset you want to convert,
e.g. image classification annotations can be
saved in `ImageNet` format, but no as `COCO keypoints`.

There are few ways to convert Pascal VOC dataset to other dataset format:

``` bash
datum import -f voc -i <path/to/voc>
datum export -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
# or
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>

```

Some formats provide extra options for conversion.
These options are passed after double dash (`--`) in the command line.
To get information about them, run

`datum export -f <FORMAT> -- -h`

## Export to Pascal VOC

There are few ways to convert an existing dataset to Pascal VOC format:

``` bash
# export dataset into Pascal VOC format (classification) from existing project
datum export -p <path/to/project> -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> -- --tasks classification

# converting to Pascal VOC format from other format
datum convert -if imagenet -i <path/to/imagenet/dataset> \
    -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> \
    -- --label_map voc --save-images
```

Extra options for export to Pascal VOC format:

- `--save-images` allow to export dataset with saving images

> (be default `False`);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(by default `False`);
```

> # Working with Pascal VOC dataset from CLI

Reviewer: Think of better placement for this text. The current variant looks a bit clumsy and unorganized. Consider adding a documentation section with tutorials or with format documentations.

## Contents
- [Load Pascal VOC dataset](#load-pascal-voc-dataset)
- [Export to other formats](#export-to-other-formats)
- [Export to Pascal VOC](#export-to-pascal-vOC)
- [Datumaro functionality](#datumaro-functionality)
- [Dataset statistics](#dataset-statistics)

> 

Reviewer: I think, a section with uses from code would also be useful.

datum add path -f voc_detection <path/to/dataset/ImageSets/Main/train.txt>
```
In addition to `voc_detection`, Datumaro supports
`voc_action` (for action classification task),
`voc_classification`,
`voc_segmentation`,
`voc_layout` (for person layout task).

To make sure that the selected dataset has been added to the project, you can run
`datum info`

## Export to other formats

Datumaro supports converting Pascal VOC dataset to
[all dataset formats that datumaro supports](../docs/user_manual.md#supported-formats).
But the converting will be successful only if the output format supports the
type of dataset you want to convert.

There are few ways to convert Pascal VOC dataset to other dataset format:

``` bash
datum project import -f voc -i <path/to/voc>
datum export -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
# or
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> -f coco -o <path/to/output/dir>
```

Also it is possible using filters for converting, check
[user manual](../docs/user_manual.md#filter-project)
for information about filtering:

``` bash
datum convert -if voc -i <path/to/voc> \
    -f yolo -o <path/to/output/dir> \
    --filter-mode FILTER_MODE \
    --filter '<xpath filter expression>'
```

> Some formats have extra arguments for converting, run `datum export -f FORMAT -- -h`
> for more information. For example voc_segmentation format has extra argument
> `--label_map` which get opportunity to load user color map for segmentation mask:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some formats provide extra options for conversion. To get information about them, 
run `datum export -f <FORMAT> -- -h`. These options are passed after double dash (`--`) in the command line.
For example, the `voc_segmentation` format has an extra argument `--label_map`,
which provides an option to load a custom color map for segmentation masks:
```

# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
```

Also you can use original voc format of label map, for example:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

## Export to Pascal VOC

There are few ways to convert dataset to Pascal VOC format:

``` bash
# export dataset into Pascal VOC format (classification) from existing project
datum export -p <path/to/project> -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> -- --tasks classification

# converting to Pascal VOC format from other format
datum convert -if imagenet -i <path/to/imagenet/dataset> \
    -f voc -o <path/to/export/dir> \
    -- --label_map voc --save-images
```

Argument `--tasks` allow to specify tasks for export dataset,
by default datumaro uses all tasks.
Argument   `--label_map` allow to define user label map, for example

``` bash
# mycolormap.txt [label : color_rgb : parts : actions]:
# cat:0,0,255::
# person:255,0,0:head:
datum export -f voc_segmentation -- --label-map mycolormap.txt
```

Or you can use original Pascal VOC label map:

``` bash
datum export -f voc_layout -- --label-map voc
```

## Datumaro functionality

> Datumaro supports filtering, transformation, merging and etc. for all formats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datumaro supports filtering, transformation, merging etc. for all formats
```

and for the Pascal VOC format in particular. Follow
[user manual](../docs/user_manual.md)
to get more information about these operations.

> There are few examples of using datumaro operations to solve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are few examples of using Datumaro operations to solve
```

particular problems:

- We can convert Pascal VOC dataset to Market-1501 format. But Market-1501 dataset
only has a `person` class, marked with a bounding box. And to perform the conversion
we could filter the Pascal VOC dataset. With datumaro we can do it like this

``` bash
# create datumaro project with Pascal VOC dataset
datum import -o <path/to/voc/dataset> --name project

# convert labeled shapes into bboxes
datum transform -t shapes_into_boxes
cd project-shapes_to_boxes

# keep only person class items
datum filter --mode items+annotations \
    -e '/item[label="person"]' \
    -o <path/to/output/project>

# delete other labels from dataset

> datum trasnform -t remap_labels -- -l person:person --default delete \

Reviewer: I suggest to provide a concrete working example instead of a list of unrelated commands. Ensure they can be executed.

Author: But, this example solve concrete task: preparing Pascal VOC dataset for converting to other dataset format, using related set of Datumaro operations. Isn`t it?

Reviewer: This example cannot be executed and it wouldn't create the expected dataset. Please make sure these commands do what they are supposed to do.

    -o <path/to/final/project>
```

To make sure that the converting was succesful we can check the output project:

```bash
cd <path/to/final/project>
datum info
```

- Pascal VOC 2007 use about 900MB disk space, you can store half as much if keep
only store the test subset, and with datumaro split the test subset into test
and training subsets:

```bash
# create datumaro project with Pascal VOC 2007 (only test subset) dataset
datum import -o ./VOC2007 --name project

# split the test subset into test and training subsets
datum transform -t random_split

# or you can specify ratio for subsets (by default test:.67 train:.33)
datum transform -t random_split -- -s train:.5 -s test:.5
```

- If you don`t need a variety of classes in Pascal VOC dataset,

> with datumaro you can group the classes for your task:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with Datumaro you can group the classes for your task:
```

The following command won't group classes, it will rename and join them. I suggest to pick a better term for this.

```bash
# create datumaro project with Pascal VOC dataset
datum import -o ./VOC2007 --name project

# group the classes
datum transform -t remap_labels -- -l car:vehicle -l aeroplane:vehicle \
    -l bicycle:vehicle -l boat:vehicle -l bus:vehicle -l car:vehicle \
    -l train:vehicle -l motorbike:vehicle -l bottle:indoor -l chair:indoor \
    -l diningtable:indoor -l pottedplant:indoor -l sofa:indoor \
    -l tvmonitor:indoor -l bird:animal -l cat:animal -l dog:animal \
    -l horse:animal -l sheep:animal -l cow:animal -l person:person \
    --default delete
```

- When choosing a dataset for research, it is often useful to find out how the
datasets differ from each other, to see information about this difference, you
can run `datum diff`. For example calculate difference between Pascal VOC 2007
and Pascal VOC 2012:

```bash
# create project with Pascal 2007 dataset
datum import -p ./project2007 -f voc <path/to/voc/2007>

# create project with Pascal 2012 dataset
datum import -p ./project2012 -f voc <path/to/voc/2012>

# calculate difference
datum diff -p ./proect2012 ./project2007

Datasets have different lengths: 14974 vs 34314

> Unmatched items in the first dataset: {('00973', 'train'), ...}

Reviewer: It will be good to show that the final result actually matches the expected difference, which is shown in the official dataset description. Now it is just a result with no meaning.

```

- Datumaro also have many others operations run
`datum --help` and `datum transform --help` for more information

## Dataset statistics

> Datumaro can calculate dataset statistics, the command `datum stats` creating

Reviewer: This section looks too generic and unrelated to PASCAL VOC.

`statistics.json` file which contain detailed information of the project dataset.

- With `datum stats` you can check the success of the operations performed on the dataset.
Example:
<details>

```
datum stats

# statisctics.json:
...
"annotations by type": {

"bbox": {
"count": 3
},
"caption": {
"count": 0
},
"label": {
"count": 11
},
"mask": {
"count": 1
},
"points": {
"count": 0
},
"polygon": {
"count": 0
},
"polyline": {
"count": 0
}
},
...

# perform operations:
datum transform -t boxes_to_masks -o <path/to/output/dir>

# check changes
cd <path/to/output/dir>
datum stats

# now we see that there are no boxes in the dataset, but there are 4 masks
# statistics.json
...
"annotations by type": {
"bbox": {
"count": 0
},
"caption": {
"count": 0
},
"label": {
"count": 11
},
"mask": {
"count": 4
},
"points": {
"count": 0
},
"polygon": {
"count": 0
},
"polyline": {
"count": 0
}
}
...
```

</details>

- Also, `datum stats` includes information about how many items each class contains,
example for Pascal VOC 2012:

> <details>

Reviewer: The formatting is broken here
